# Dissenting Opinion (Brennan, joined by Marshall, Blackmun)

JUSTICE BRENNAN, with whom JUSTICE MARSHALL and JUSTICE BLACKMUN join, dissenting.

> "Medical technology has effectively created a twilight zone of suspended animation where death commences while life, in some form, continues. Some patients, however, want no part of a life sustained only by medical technology. Instead, they prefer a plan of medical treatment that allows nature to take its course and permits them to die with dignity."[\[1\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[18])

Nancy Cruzan has dwelt in that twilight zone for six years. She is oblivious to her surroundings and will remain so. Her body twitches only reflexively, without consciousness. The areas of her brain that once thought, felt, and experienced sensations have degenerated badly and are continuing to do so. The cavities remaining are filling with cerebrospinal fluid. The "\`cerebral cortical atrophy is irreversible, permanent, progressive and ongoing.' \[...] Nancy will never interact meaningfully with her environment again. She will remain in a persistent vegetative state until her death." \[...][\[2\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[19]) Because she cannot swallow, her nutrition and hydration are delivered through a tube surgically implanted in her stomach.

A grown woman at the time of the accident, Nancy had previously expressed her wish to forgo continuing medical care under circumstances such as these. Her family and her friends are convinced that this is what she would want. A guardian ad litem appointed by the trial court is also convinced that this is what Nancy would want. Yet the Missouri Supreme Court, alone among state courts deciding such a question, has determined that an irreversibly vegetative patient will remain a passive prisoner of medical technology — for Nancy, perhaps for the next 30 years.

Today the Court, while tentatively accepting that there is some degree of constitutionally protected liberty interest in avoiding unwanted medical treatment, including life-sustaining medical treatment such as artificial nutrition and hydration, affirms the decision of the Missouri Supreme Court. The majority opinion, as I read it, would affirm that decision on the ground that a State may require "clear and convincing" evidence of Nancy Cruzan's prior decision to forgo life-sustaining treatment under circumstances such as hers in order to ensure that her actual wishes are honored. Because I believe that Nancy Cruzan has a fundamental right to be free of unwanted artificial nutrition and hydration, which right is not outweighed by any interests of the State, and because I find that the improperly biased procedural obstacles imposed by the Missouri Supreme Court impermissibly burden that right, I respectfully dissent. Nancy Cruzan is entitled to choose to die with dignity.

## I

### A

"\[T]he timing of death—once a matter of fate — is now a matter of human choice." Office of Technology Assessment Task Force, Life Sustaining Technologies and the Elderly 41 (1988). Of the approximately 2 million people who die each year, 80% die in hospitals and long-term care institutions,[\[3\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[20]) and perhaps 70% of those after a decision to forgo life-sustaining treatment has been made.[\[4\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[21]) Nearly every death involves a decision whether to undertake some medical procedure that could prolong the process of dying. Such decisions are difficult and personal. They must be made on the basis of individual values, informed by medical realities, yet within a framework governed by law. The role of the courts is confined to defining that framework, delineating the ways in which government may and may not participate in such decisions.

The question before this Court is a relatively narrow one: whether the Due Process Clause allows Missouri to require a now-incompetent patient in an irreversible persistent vegetative state to remain on life support absent rigorously clear and convincing evidence that avoiding the treatment represents the patient's prior, express choice. If a fundamental right is at issue, Missouri's rule of decision must be scrutinized under the standards this Court has always applied in such circumstances. As we said in [_Zablocki_ v. _Redhail,_ 434 U. S. 374, 388 (1978),](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=13286124172413088195\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50) if a requirement imposed by a State "significantly interferes with the exercise of a fundamental right, it cannot be upheld unless it is supported by sufficiently important state interests and is closely tailored to effectuate only those interests." The Constitution imposes on this Court the obligation to "examine carefully. . . the extent to which \[the legitimate government interests advanced] are served by the challenged regulation." \[...]

### B

The starting point for our legal analysis must be whether a competent person has a constitutional right to avoid unwanted medical care. Earlier this Term, this Court held that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment confers a significant liberty interest in avoiding unwanted medical treatment. [_Washington_ v. _Harper,_ 494 U. S. 210, 221-222 (1990)](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=13274222040240404814\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50). Today, the Court concedes that our prior decisions "support the recognition of a general liberty interest in refusing medical treatment." \[...] The Court, however, avoids discussing either the measure of that liberty interest or its application by assuming, for purposes of this case only, that a competent person has a constitutionally protected liberty interest in being free of unwanted artificial nutrition and hydration. JUSTICE O'CONNOR'S opinion is less parsimonious. She openly affirms that "the Court has often deemed state incursions into the body repugnant to the interests protected by the Due Process Clause," that there is a liberty interest in avoiding unwanted medical treatment, and that it encompasses the right to be free of "artificially delivered food and water." \[...]

But if a competent person has a liberty interest to be free of unwanted medical treatment, as both the majority and JUSTICE O'CONNOR concede, it must be fundamental. "We are dealing here with \[a decision] which involves one of the basic civil rights of man." [_Skinner_ v. _Oklahoma ex rel. Williamson_ ](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8050731321644873759\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50)(invalidating a statute authorizing sterilization of certain felons). Whatever other liberties protected by the Due Process Clause are fundamental, "those liberties that are \`deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition'" are among them. [_Bowers_ v. _Hardwick_](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=14901730125647575103\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50).

The right to be free from medical attention without consent, to determine what shall be done with one's own body, _is_ deeply rooted in this Nation's traditions, as the majority acknowledges. This right has long been "firmly entrenched in American tort law" and is securely grounded in the earliest common law. \[...] "Anglo-American law starts with the premise of thorough-going self determination. It follows that each man is considered to be master of his own body, and he may, if he be of sound mind, expressly prohibit the performance of lifesaving surgery, or other medical treatment." \[...] \[F]reedom from unwanted medical attention is unquestionably among those principles "so rooted in the traditions and conscience of our people as to be ranked as fundamental." \[...][\[5\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[22])

That there may be serious consequences involved in refusal of the medical treatment at issue here does not vitiate the right under our common-law tradition of medical self-determination. It is "a well-established rule of general law. . . that it is the patient, not the physician, who ultimately decides if treatment — any treatment —is to be given at all.. . . The rule has never been qualified in its application by either the nature or purpose of the treatment, or the gravity of the consequences of acceding to or foregoing it." \[...][\[6\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[23])

No material distinction can be drawn between the treatment to which Nancy Cruzan continues to be subject — artificial nutrition and hydration—and any other medical treatment. The artificial delivery of nutrition and hydration is undoubtedly medical treatment. The technique to which Nancy Cruzan is subject—artificial feeding through a gastrostomy tube—involves a tube implanted surgically into her stomach through incisions in her abdominal wall. It may obstruct the intestinal tract, erode and pierce the stomach wall, or cause leakage of the stomach's contents into the abdominal cavity. The tube can cause pneumonia from reflux of the stomach's contents into the lung. Typically, and in this case, commercially prepared formulas are used, rather than fresh food. The type of formula and method of administration must be experimented with to avoid gastrointestinal problems. The patient must be monitored daily by medical personnel as to weight, fluid intake, and fluid output; blood tests must be done weekly.

Artificial delivery of food and water is regarded as medical treatment by the medical profession and the Federal Government.[\[7\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[24]) According to the American Academy of Neurology: "The artificial provision of nutrition and hydration is a form of medical treatment . . . analogous to other forms of life-sustaining treatment, such as the use of the respirator. When a patient is unconscious, both a respirator and an artificial feeding device serve to support or replace normal bodily functions that are compromised as a result of the patient's illness." \[...]

Nor does the fact that Nancy Cruzan is now incompetent deprive her of her fundamental rights. \[...] As the majority recognizes, _ante,_ at 280, the question is not whether an incompetent has constitutional rights, but how such rights may be exercised. As we explained in [_Thompson_ v. _Oklahoma_](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=11371923587626073007\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50): "The law must often adjust the manner in which it affords rights to those whose status renders them unable to exercise choice freely and rationally. Children, the insane, and _those who are irreversibly ill with loss of brain function, for instance, all retain \`rights,'_ to be sure, but often such rights are only meaningful as they are exercised by agents acting with the best interests of their principals in mind." To deny \[its] exercise because the patient is unconscious or incompetent would be to deny the right." \[...]

## II

### A

The right to be free from unwanted medical attention is a right to evaluate the potential benefit of treatment and its possible consequences according to one's own values and to make a personal decision whether to subject oneself to the intrusion. For a patient like Nancy Cruzan, the sole benefit of medical treatment is being kept metabolically alive. Neither artificial nutrition nor any other form of medical treatment available today can cure or in any way ameliorate her condition.[\[8\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[25]) Irreversibly vegetative patients are devoid of thought, emotion, and sensation; they are permanently and completely unconscious. [\[9\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[26]) As the President's Commission concluded in approving the withdrawal of life support equipment from irreversibly vegetative patients:

> "\[T]reatment ordinarily aims to benefit a patient through preserving life, relieving pain and suffering, protecting against disability, and returning maximally effective functioning. If a prognosis of permanent unconsciousness is correct, however, continued treatment cannot confer such benefits. Pain and suffering are absent, as are joy, satisfaction, and pleasure. Disability is total and no return to an even minimal level of social or human functioning is possible." President's Commission 181-182.

There are also affirmative reasons why someone like Nancy might choose to forgo artificial nutrition and hydration under these circumstances. Dying is personal. And it is profound. For many, the thought of an ignoble end, steeped in decay, is abhorrent. A quiet, proud death, bodily integrity [311](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#p311)[\*311](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#p311) intact, is a matter of extreme consequence. "In certain, thankfully rare, circumstances the burden of maintaining the corporeal existence degrades the very humanity it was meant to serve." [_Brophy_ v. _New England Sinai Hosp., Inc._ ](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17773102224660987788\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50)(finding the subject of the proceeding "in a condition which \[he] has indicated he would consider to be degrading and without human dignity" and holding that "\[t]he duty of the State to preserve life must encompass a recognition of an individual's right to avoid circumstances in which the individual himself would feel that efforts to sustain life demean or degrade his humanity"). Another court, hearing a similar case, noted:

> "It is apparent from the testimony that what was on \[the patient's] mind was not only the invasiveness of life-sustaining systems, such as the \[nasogastric] tube, upon the integrity of his body. It was also the utter helplessness of the permanently comatose person, the wasting of a once strong body, and the submission of the most private bodily functions to the attention of others." [_In re Gardner,_ 534 A. 2d 947, 953 (Me. 1987)](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=2948372213720686836\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50).

Such conditions are, for many, humiliating to contemplate,[\[10\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[27]) as is visiting a prolonged and anguished vigil on one's parents, spouse, and children. A long, drawn-out death can have a debilitating effect on family members. For some, the idea of being remembered in their persistent vegetative states rather than as they were before their illness or accident may be very disturbing.[\[11\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[28])

### B

Although the right to be free of unwanted medical intervention, like other constitutionally protected interests, may not be absolute,[\[12\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[29]) no state interest could outweigh the rights of an individual in Nancy Cruzan's position. Whatever a State's possible interests in mandating life-support treatment under other circumstances, there is no good to be obtained here by Missouri's insistence that Nancy Cruzan remain on life-support systems if it is indeed her wish not to do so. Missouri does not claim, nor could it, that society as a whole will be benefited by Nancy's receiving medical treatment.No third party's situation will be improved and no harm to others will be averted.[\[13\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[30])

The only state interest asserted here is a general interest in the preservation of life.[\[14\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[31]) But the State has no legitimate general interest in someone's life, completely abstracted from the interest of the person living that life, that could outweigh the person's choice to avoid medical treatment. "\[T]he regulation of constitutionally protected decisions . . . must be predicated on legitimate state concerns _other than_ disagreement with the choice the individual has made. . . . Otherwise, the interest in liberty protected by the Due Process Clause would be a nullity." \[...] Thus, the State's general interest in life must accede to Nancy Cruzan's particularized and intense interest in self-determination in her choice of medical treatment. There is simply nothing legitimately within the State's purview to be gained by superseding her decision.

Moreover, there may be considerable danger that Missouri's rule of decision would impair rather than serve any interest the State does have in sustaining life. Current medical practice recommends use of heroic measures if there is a scintilla of a chance that the patient will recover, on the assumption that the measures will be discontinued should the patient improve. When the President's Commission in 1982 approved the withdrawal of life-support equipment from irreversibly vegetative patients, it explained that "\[a]n even more troubling wrong occurs when a treatment that might save life or improve health is not started because the health care personnel are afraid that they will find it very difficult to stop the treatment if, as is fairly likely, it proves to be of little benefit and greatly burdens the patient." \[...] A New Jersey court recognized that families as well as doctors might be discouraged by an inability to stop life-support measures from "even attempting certain types of care \[which] could thereby force them into hasty and premature decisions to allow a patient to die." \[...][\[15\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[32])

## III

\[...]

### A

The majority offers several justifications for Missouri's heightened evidentiary standard. First, the majority explains that the State may constitutionally adopt this rule to govern determinations of an incompetent's wishes in order to advance the State's substantive interests, including its unqualified interest in the preservation of human life. Missouri's evidentiary standard, however, cannot rest on the State's own interest in a particular substantive result. To be sure, courts have long erected clear and convincing evidence standards to place the greater risk of erroneous decisions on those bringing disfavored claims.[\[16\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[33]) In such cases, however, the choice to discourage certain claims was a legitimate, constitutional policy choice. In contrast, Missouri has no such power to disfavor a choice by Nancy Cruzan to avoid medical treatment, because Missouri has no legitimate interest in providing Nancy with treatment until it is established that this represents her choice. Just as a State may not override Nancy's choice directly, it may not do so indirectly through the imposition of a procedural rule.

Second, the majority offers two explanations for why Missouri's clear and convincing evidence standard is a means of enhancing accuracy, but neither is persuasive. The majority initially argues that a clear and convincing evidence standard is necessary to compensate for the possibility that such proceedings will lack the "guarantee of accurate factfinding that the adversary process brings with it" \[...] Without supporting the Court's decision in that case, I note that the proceeding to determine an incompetent's wishes is quite different from a proceeding to determine whether a minor may bypass notifying her parents before undergoing an abortion on the ground that she is mature enough to make the decision or that the abortion is in her best interests.

An adversarial proceeding is of particular importance when one side has a strong personal interest which needs to be counterbalanced to assure the court that the questions will be fully explored. A minor who has a strong interest in obtaining permission for an abortion without notifying her parents may come forward whether or not society would be satisfied that she has made the decision with the seasoned judgment of an adult. The proceeding here is of a different nature. Barring venal motives, which a trial court has the means of ferreting out, the decision to come forward to request a judicial order to stop treatment represents a slowly and carefully considered resolution by at least one adult and more frequently several adults that discontinuation of treatment is the patient's wish.

In addition, the bypass procedure at issue in [_Akron_ ](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=15668725553029570979\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50)is _ex parte_ and secret. The court may not notify the minor's parents, siblings, or friends. No one may be present to submit evidence unless brought forward by the minor herself. In contrast, the proceeding to determine Nancy Cruzan's wishes was neither _ex parte_ nor secret. In a hearing to determine the treatment preferences of an incompetent person, a court is not limited to adjusting burdens of proof as its only means of protecting against a possible imbalance. Indeed, any concern that those who come forward will present a one-sided view would be better addressed by appointing a guardian ad litem, who could use the State's powers of discovery to gather and present evidence regarding the patient's wishes. A guardian ad litem's task is to uncover any conflicts of interest and ensure that each party likely to have relevant evidence is consulted and brought forward — for example, other members of the family, friends, clergy, and doctors. Missouri's heightened evidentiary standard attempts to achieve balance by discounting evidence; the guardian ad litem technique achieves balance by probing for additional evidence. Where, as here, the family members, friends, doctors, and guardian ad litem agree, it is not because the process has failed, as the majority suggests. It is because there is no genuine dispute as to Nancy's preference.

\[...]

The majority claims that the allocation of the risk of error is justified because it is more important not to terminate life support for someone who would wish it continued than to honor the wishes of someone who would not. An erroneous decision to terminate life support is irrevocable, says the majority, while an erroneous decision not to terminate "results in a maintenance of the status quo."[\[17\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[34]) But, from the point of view of the patient, an erroneous decision in either direction is irrevocable. An erroneous decision to terminate artificial nutrition and hydration, to be sure, will lead to failure of that last remnant of physiological life, the brain stem, and result in complete brain death. An erroneous decision not to terminate life support, however, robs a patient of the very qualities protected by the right to avoid unwanted medical treatment. His own degraded existence is perpetuated; his family's suffering is protracted; the memory he leaves behind becomes more and more distorted.

Even a later decision to grant him his wish cannot undo the intervening harm. But a later decision is unlikely in any event. "\[T]he discovery of new evidence," to which the majority refers is more hypothetical than plausible. The majority also misconceives the relevance of the possibility of "advancements in medical science" by treating it as a reason to force someone to continue medical treatment against his will. The possibility of a medical miracle is indeed part of the calculus, but it is a part of the _patient's_ calculus. If current research suggests that some hope for cure or even moderate improvement is possible within the lifespan projected, this is a factor that should be and would be accorded significant weight in assessing what the patient himself would choose.[\[18\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[35])

### B

\[...] The court also failed to consider testimony from Nancy's mother and sister that they were certain that Nancy would want to discontinue artificial nutrition and hydration,[\[20\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[37]) even after the court found that Nancy's family was loving and without malignant motive. The court also failed to consider the conclusions of the guardian ad litem, appointed by the trial court, that there was clear and convincing evidence that Nancy would want to discontinue medical treatment and that this was in her best interests. The court did not specifically define what kind of evidence it would consider clear and convincing, but its general discussion suggests that only a living will or equivalently formal directive from the patient when competent would meet this standard.

Too few people execute living wills or equivalently formal directives for such an evidentiary rule to ensure adequately that the wishes of incompetent persons will be honored.[\[21\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[38]) While it might be a wise social policy to encourage people to furnish such instructions, no general conclusion about a patient's choice can be drawn from the absence of formalities. The probability of becoming irreversibly vegetative is so low that many people may not feel an urgency to marshal formal evidence of their preferences. Some may not wish to dwell on their own physical deterioration and mortality. Even someone with a resolute determination to avoid life support under circumstances such as Nancy's would still need to know that such things as living wills exist and how to execute one. Often legal help would be necessary, especially given the majority's apparent willingness to permit States to insist that a person's wishes are not truly known unless the particular medical treatment is specified.

As a California appellate court observed: "The lack of generalized public awareness of the statutory scheme and the typically human characteristics of procrastination and reluctance to contemplate the need for such arrangements however makes this a tool which will all too often go unused by those who might desire it." \[...] When a person tells family or close friends that she does not want her life sustained artificially, she is "express\[ing] her wishes in the only terms familiar to her, and . . . as clearly as a lay person should be asked to express them. To require more is unrealistic, and for all practical purposes, it precludes the right of patients to forego life-sustaining treatment." \[...][\[22\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[39]) When Missouri enacted a living will statute, it specifically provided that the absence of a living will does not warrant a presumption that a patient wishes continued medical treatment. Thus, apparently not even Missouri's own legislature believes that a person who does not execute a living will fails to do so because he wishes continuous medical treatment under all circumstances.

The testimony of close friends and family members, on the other hand, may often be the best evidence available of what the patient's choice would be. It is they with whom the patient most likely will have discussed such questions and they who know the patient best. "Family members have a unique knowledge of the patient which is vital to any decision on his or her behalf." Newman, Treatment Refusals for the Critically and Terminally Ill: Proposed Rules for the Family, the Physician, and the State, 3 N. Y. L. S. Human Rights Annual 35, 46 (1985). The Missouri court's decision to ignore this whole category of testimony is also at odds with the practices of other States. \[...]

The Missouri court's disdain for Nancy's statements in serious conversations not long before her accident, for the opinions of Nancy's family and friends as to her values, beliefs and certain choice, and even for the opinion of an outside objective factfinder appointed by the State evinces a disdain for Nancy Cruzan's own right to choose. The rules by which an incompetent person's wishes are determined must represent every effort to determine those wishes. The rule that the Missouri court adopted and that this Court upholds, however, skews the result away from a determination that as accurately as possible reflects the individual's own preferences and beliefs. It is a rule that transforms human beings into passive subjects of medical technology.

> "\[M]edical care decisions must be guided by the individual patient's interests and values. Allowing persons to determine their own medical treatment is an important way in which society respects persons as individuals. Moreover, the respect due to persons as individuals does not diminish simply because they have become incapable of participating in treatment decisions. . . . \[I]t is still possible for others to make a decision that reflects \[the patient's] interests more closely than would a purely technological decision to do whatever is possible. Lacking the ability to decide, \[a patient] has a right to a decision that takes his interests into account." [_Conservatorship of Drabick,_ 200 Cal. App. 3d 185, 208, 245 Cal. Rptr. 840, 854-855,](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=5736773484520337509\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50) cert. denied, [488 U. S. 958 (1988)](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?about=15710179749803373214\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50).

### C

I do not suggest that States must sit by helplessly if the choices of incompetent patients are in danger of being ignored. See _ante,_ at 281. Even if the Court had ruled that Missouri's rule of decision is unconstitutional, as I believe it should have, States would nevertheless remain free to fashion procedural protections to safeguard the interests of incompetents under these circumstances. The Constitution provides merely a framework here: Protections must be genuinely aimed at ensuring decisions commensurate with the will of the patient, and must be reliable as instruments to that end. Of the many States which have instituted such protections, Missouri is virtually the only one to have fashioned a rule that lessens the likelihood of accurate determinations. In contrast, nothing in the Constitution prevents States from reviewing the advisability of a family decision, by requiring a court proceeding or by appointing an impartial guardian ad litem.

There are various approaches to determining an incompetent patient's treatment choice in use by the several States today, and there may be advantages and disadvantages to each and other approaches not yet envisioned. The choice, in largest part, is and should be left to the States, so long as each State is seeking, in a reliable manner, to discover what the patient would want. But with such momentous interests in the balance, States must avoid procedures that will prejudice the decision. "To err either way—to keep a person alive under circumstances under which he would rather have been allowed to die, or to allow that person to die when he would have chosen to cling to life—would be deeply unfortunate." [_In re Conroy,_ 98 N. J., at 343, 486 A. 2d, at 1220](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=2290154573715145215\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50).

### D

Finally, I cannot agree with the majority that where it is not possible to determine what choice an incompetent patient would make, a State's role as _parens patriae_ permits the State automatically to make that choice itself. Under fair rules of evidence, it is improbable that a court could not determine what the patient's choice would be. Under the rule of decision adopted by Missouri and upheld today by this Court, such occasions might be numerous. But in neither case does it follow that it is constitutionally acceptable for the State invariably to assume the role of deciding for the patient. A State's legitimate interest in safeguarding a patient's choice cannot be furthered by simply appropriating it.

The majority justifies its position by arguing that, while close family members may have a strong feeling about the question, "there is no automatic assurance that the view of close family members will necessarily be the same as the patient's would have been had she been confronted with the prospect of her situation while competent." \[...] I cannot quarrel with this observation. But it leads only to another question: Is there any reason to suppose that a State is _more_ likely to make the choice that the patient would have made than someone who knew the patient intimately? To ask this is to answer it. As the New Jersey Supreme Court observed: "Family members are best qualified to make substituted judgments for incompetent patients not only because of their peculiar grasp of the patient's approach to life, but also because of their special bonds with him or her. . . . It is . . . they who treat the patient as a person, rather than a symbol of a cause." [_In re Jobes_ ](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=4325947837235429353\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50)\[...]. The State, in contrast, is a stranger to the patient.

A State's inability to discern an incompetent patient's choice still need not mean that a State is rendered powerless to protect that choice. But I would find that the Due Process Clause prohibits a State from doing more than that. A State may ensure that the person who makes the decision on the patient's behalf is the one whom the patient himself would have selected to make that choice for him. And a State may exclude from consideration anyone having improper motives. But a State generally must either repose the choice with the person whom the patient himself would most likely have chosen as proxy or leave the decision to the patient's family.[\[23\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[40])

## IV

As many as 10,000 patients are being maintained in persistent vegetative states in the United States, and the number is expected to increase significantly in the near future. Medical technology, developed over the past 20 or so years, is often capable of resuscitating people after they have stopped breathing or their hearts have stopped beating. Some of those people are brought fully back to life. Two decades ago, those who were not and could not swallow and digest food, died. Intravenous solutions could not provide sufficient calories to maintain people for more than a short time. Today, various forms of artificial feeding have been developed that are able to keep people metabolically alive for years, even decades. \[...] In addition, in this century, chronic or degenerative ailments have replaced communicable diseases as the primary causes of death. \[...] The 80% of Americans who die in hospitals are "likely to meet their end . . . \`in a sedated or comatose state; betubed nasally, abdominally and intravenously; and far more like manipulated objects than like moral subjects.'"[\[24\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[41]) A fifth of all adults surviving to age 80 will suffer a progressive dementing disorder prior to death. \[...]

\[...] The new medical technology can reclaim those who would have been irretrievably lost a few decades ago and restore them to active lives. For Nancy Cruzan, it failed, and for others with wasting incurable disease, it may be doomed to failure. In these unfortunate situations, the bodies and preferences and memories of the victims do not escheat to the State; nor does our Constitution permit the State or any other government to commandeer them. No singularity of feeling exists upon which such a government might confidently rely as _parens patriae._ The President's Commission, after years of research, concluded:

> "In few areas of health care are people's evaluations of their experiences so varied and uniquely personal as in their assessments of the nature and value of the processes associated with dying. For some, every moment of life is of inestimable value; for others, life without some desired level of mental or physical ability is worthless or burdensome. A moderate degree of suffering may be an important means of personal growth and religious experience to one person, but only frightening or despicable to another." \[....]

Yet Missouri and this Court have displaced Nancy's own assessment of the processes associated with dying. They have discarded evidence of her will, ignored her values, and deprived her of the right to a decision as closely approximating her own choice as humanly possible. They have done so disingenuously in her name and openly in Missouri's own. That Missouri and this Court may truly be motivated only by concern for incompetent patients makes no matter. As one of our most prominent jurists warned us decades ago: "Experience should teach us to be most on our guard to protect liberty when the government's purposes are beneficent. . . . The greatest dangers to liberty lurk in insidious encroachment by men of zeal, well meaning but without understanding." \[...]

I respectfully dissent.

***

Tags: autonomy, self-determination, informed consent, constitutional rights, right of privacy, right to refuse treatment, right to refuse medical treatment, withdrawal of treatment, persistent vegetative state, life support, right to die, feeding tube, artificial nutrition, artificial hydration, competence, quality of life, advanced directive, living will, substituted judgment, suicide

***

<details>

<summary><mark style="color:red;"><strong>Editorial Notes, Attributions, and Licensing</strong></mark></summary>

Editing to the [original](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=497+U.S.+261+\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#p301), excluding any original footnotes (hyperlinked or otherwise), by Matthew L. Mac Kelly. Many of the court's citations to authorities have been omitted for length and readability purposes. Otherwise, elisions are identified by bracketed ellipses (e.g., \[...]), several of which reveal elided text by clicking on inline annotation indicators (e.g., \[...]). Judicial decisions and annotations thereto are not subject to copyright protection and are in the public domain. _See, e.g., Georgia v. Public.Resource.Org, Inc_., [140 S. Ct. 1498](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8288711378870515248\&q=Georgia+et+al.+v.+Public.Resource.Org,+Inc.\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50) (2020). This page is in the public domain.

</details>
