# Forrest v. Parry

\[Note: Edited from the [<mark style="color:blue;">original</mark>](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/4638072/alanda-forrest-v-kevin-parry/).]

***

930 F.3d 93 (3d Cir. Ct. App. 2019)

Third Circuit Court of Appeals

**Alanda Forrest**\
**v.**\
**Kevin Parry et al.**

OPINION

GREENAWAY, JR., Circuit Judge.

## \[Introduction]

In [_Beck v. City of Pittsburgh_](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/722376/robert-beck-v-city-of-pittsburgh/) \[1996], we were faced with what we deemed “a question of considerable interest in \[a] period of alleged rising police brutality in major cities across the country”—what is sufficient evidence from which a jury can infer that a municipality adopted a custom of permitting its police officers to use excessive force? \[...] More than two decades later, the interest and allegations persist, and, as it would appear, so does the question.

The evidence in this case demonstrates that the Internal Affairs Unit (“Internal Affairs”) of the since-disbanded Camden Police Department was woefully deficient in investigating civilian complaints about officer misconduct. Citing [_Beck_](https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/722376/robert-beck-v-city-of-pittsburgh/), the District Court found this to be sufficient. However, the Court narrowed the case to only this evidence, and, as a result, did not consider its significance when combined with the non-Internal Affairs-related deficiencies in Camden’s supervision and training of its police officers. \[...]

## I. Background

### A.

On July 1, 2008, two police officers kicked down several doors of the residence at 1270 Morton Street, Camden, New Jersey (“1270 Morton”). According to Forrest, his encounter with the officers began with him pinned between the wall and the door of the upstairs bedroom, which had been kicked open. He heard his acquaintance, Kennedy Blevins, twice scream, “why you beating on me\[?]” \[...] One officer asked, “where the drugs at?” and Blevins twice responded, “I don’t know what you talking about.” \[...]

Just a few hours earlier, Forrest had just finished work for a housing contractor at a house across the street. He went to 1270 Morton Street to speak with some acquaintances. He and one such acquaintance—Shahede Green—had been on the porch for a while when the two noticed a police car “coming down the opposite direction” on a one-way street. \[...] It was around midnight at this point, so Forrest decided to call a cab. The two went inside as Forrest waited for the cab to arrive. While waiting, Forrest heard a number of sounds that caused him to be alarmed, all of which culminated in what sounded like someone kicking the front door.

At the time, the house was occupied by Forrest, Green, Blevins, and two women. One of the women was known as Hot Dog and the other, Kesha Brown. Forrest left Green and Hot Dog downstairs, and went upstairs to Blevins’s room. Brown was also upstairs, in bed in what is referred to as the “front room.” \[...] As Forrest began explaining to Blevins that the front door had been kicked, Blevins’s bedroom door was kicked open. Being near the bedroom door, Forrest reflexively stepped back, and was immediately covered by the door. Forrest remained pinned between the door and the wall, fearing that he would immediately be shot by an officer if he came out from behind the door.

Through the opening between the door and the wall, Forrest heard Blevins’s screams. He saw another officer come up the stairs, and moments afterwards, heard Brown scream. Forrest saw the officer “doing something with his arm,” but could not make out what the officer was doing. \[...] Eventually, the officer told Brown to go downstairs. The officer then entered Blevins’s room, where Forrest, Blevins, and the other officer were located. One of the officers swung the door away from Forrest, and hit him in the face, knocking him out. When Forrest regained consciousness, an officer, later identified as Kevin Parry, was on top of him. Officer Parry repeatedly punched Forrest in the face. Officer Parry then handcuffed Forrest, and the officers—Parry and Jason Stetser—dragged Forrest down the stairs. Forrest suffered a laceration to his ear, facial bruising, and injuries to his knees.

Officer Parry placed Forrest in the back seat of the supervising Sergeant’s vehicle. Officer Parry proceeded to tell Forrest that any drugs found in the house would be attributed to him. The Sergeant, Dan Morris, then took Forrest to a vacant parking lot, at which point Forrest asked “I’m bleeding like crazy. Why you got me here? Why don’t you take me to the hospital?” \[...] Sergeant Morris allegedly ordered Forrest to shut up, and said, “my officers don’t plant drugs on people.” \[...] Officers Parry and Stetser arrived soon after, and Sergeant Morris passed something to Officer Parry.

Forrest was taken to the hospital to be treated thereafter. When the attending nurse inquired as to what caused his injuries, he simply told her that he tripped and fell. The officers had previously warned that if Forrest said any more, they would charge him with having assaulted five officers.

### B.

In the police report he prepared regarding this incident, Officer Parry wrote that he had observed Forrest engaging in a hand-to-hand drug transaction on the porch of 1270 Morton, and that Forrest initiated the physical altercation with him and Officer Stetser. Officer Parry testified to that version of events before the grand jury and claimed that Forrest was in possession of 49 bags of a controlled dangerous substance. Forrest was subsequently charged with possession of a controlled substance, possession with intent to distribute, possession within one thousand feet of a school, and resisting arrest.

Forrest filed a complaint with Internal Affairs on July 21, 2008. He alleged that he was assaulted by Officer Parry “and his partner,” which resulted in “a cut ear \[that] required stitches, \[bruises] on \[his] knees, pain in \[his neck], and headaches.” \[...] The complaint went nowhere, so he wrote a follow-up letter two months later. The letter reiterated the assault charges and indicated that Internal Affairs had yet to respond to Forrest’s initial complaint.

Forrest ultimately pleaded guilty to possession with intent. He was sentenced to three years and eighteen months in a New Jersey state prison. Forrest served eighteen months of that sentence. He was released when Officer Parry later admitted that he had falsified the police report regarding the incident with Forrest. Specifically, Sergeant Morris, and Officers Parry and Stetser were three of five officers that were charged with, and pleaded guilty to, conspiracy to deprive individuals of their civil rights. Officers Stetser and Parry admitted to filing false reports, planting drugs, and lying under oath in front of grand juries, at suppression hearings, and at trials. The investigation into their activities resulted in judgments vacated, charges dismissed, or pending indictments forfeited in over 200 criminal cases. As to Forrest in particular, Officer Parry admitted that he did not observe a hand-to-hand drug transaction, but falsely included that in the report he had prepared.

### C.

While still in prison, Forrest brought this action in federal court in the District of New Jersey. By April 2015, his was one of approximately 89 lawsuits brought against the City of Camden (“Camden”) based on the actions of the above-referenced officers. Camden proposed a global settlement for these suits, but Forrest opted out. He moved forward with his claims, which included a municipal liability claim under [42 U.S.C. § 1983](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=\(title:42%20section:1983%20edition:prelim\)), a conspiracy claim under [42 U.S.C. § 1985(3)](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title42-section1985\&num=0\&edition=prelim), and a state law claim for negligent supervision. Camden moved for summary judgment on all counts in March of 2015. Despite the breadth of Camden’s motion, its brief only mentioned Forrest’s municipal liability claim under § 1983.

Forrest responded in kind, with a singular focus on his § 1983 claim. His brief opposing summary judgment divided that claim into two: first, he argued that, through its policy or custom of permitting officers to be “essentially unsupervised,” Camden was “the moving force” behind the constitutional deprivation of his rights \[...]; and second, that Camden’s failure to train and supervise their officers constituted “a deliberate indifference to the rights of persons those officers would come into contact with.” \[...] The evidence he cited reflects the police department’s troubled history in the years leading up to Forrest’s arrest, and is best described in six segments, all of which pertain to Camden’s supervision and investigation of its officers.

First, the New Jersey Attorney General (“NJAG”) had been commissioned to conduct a review of Camden’s police operations on five separate occasions prior to Forrest’s arrest, in 1986, 1996, 1998, 2002 and, most recently, 2006. The NJAG twice appointed the Camden County Prosecutor to oversee the police department, once in 1998, and the other in 2003. One of the NJAG reports warned that Camden’s failure to commit manpower and resources to proactively managing police misconduct would place it “in the position of failing to adequately protect the civil rights of its citizens and sets the stage for significant civil liability.” \[...] More specifically, with a backlog of over 350 uninvestigated complaints in 2002, the same report expressly cautioned:

> The number of open investigations is simply unacceptable and overwhelms whatever progress the unit may have accomplished since our last review. ... The failure to _immediately_ address the complaint backlog and, over the longer term, ensure that the backlog _does not reoccur on a regular basis_, could lead one to conclude that the City of Camden and the police department are _deliberately indifferent_ to the conduct of its police officers and the civil rights of its citizens. \[...]

Second, Camden did not address the backlog. Rather, it maintained an extensive, recurring backlog in the years leading up to Forrest’s arrest. The backlog was as high as 487 complaints in 2004, and 461 in 2005, and, though declining, remained in 2006 and 2007, at 205, and 175, respectively. As to complaints regarding excessive force, which Forrest’s complaint and follow-up letter alleged, Camden was investigating and closing a mere fraction, and sustaining an even smaller number. Taken together, Camden sustained about 1% (7 of 622) of the complaints alleging serious misconduct from 2004 to 2008, consisting of excessive force, improper arrest, improper search, and differential treatment.

Third, the evidence suggests that the investigations that were conducted were seriously deficient. A representative example is an Internal Affairs investigative memorandum where the investigator did not interview witnesses, but rather solely based the determination on the incident reports authored by the officers involved. The memorandum derived from an investigation into a complaint filed against Officers Stetser and Parry about a year before Forrest’s arrest and which contained allegations that were nearly identical to Forrest’s. Indeed, the complainant alleged the officers planted drugs on him. The Internal Affairs investigator concluded that this complaint was “unfounded,” which means that the complainant was “lying, more or less.” \[...] This finding was premised on the incident report prepared by Officer Parry, which stated that he and Officer Stetser observed the complainant engage in a drug transaction in an alleyway. The investigation into this complaint revealed that two similar complaints had been filed against Officer Stetser, and that the incident report for both—prepared by Stetser—also stated that each complainant was separately observed engaging in a drug transaction.

The fourth segment is the testimony of former high officials in the police department, including the former Chief of Police, a former Deputy Chief, the former Supercession Executive, and the Sergeant who took over Internal Affairs in 2009. Their combined testimony reflects that, in the years leading up to and including the year of Forrest’s arrest, there were deficiencies with how the department tracked officer whereabouts, there were no performance reviews (contrary to recommendations by the 2006 NJAG report) and the sergeant-to-officer ratio was two to three times more than recommended.

Specifically, John Scott Thomson (“Chief Thomson”), who became Chief of the now-defunct Camden Police Department in 2008 and is now Chief of the newly-established Camden County Police Department, testified. He explained that, prior to his taking over the department and at the time of Forrest’s arrest, the police department “relied upon what you wrote on your log to determine where you were” and that “an officer could \[theoretically] write anything they wanted down \[, since] there just wasn’t a \[check and balance] on it.” \[...] The Supercession Executive testified that he was not aware of another major police department that did not have a performance evaluation system. Yet despite his and the NJAG’s recommendations, Camden failed to implement such a system throughout the entirety of his term.

Edward Hargis, who was Deputy Chief from 2004 through January of 2008, doubled down on that testimony, stating, “\[a]fter \[the NJAG 2006 report] was issued, we started designing a performance evaluation \[system], but then it did not become much of a concern.” \[...] Along those lines, the Sergeant who took over Internal Affairs in 2008 testified that the officer-to-sergeant ratio is supposed to be five to seven officers to a sergeant. Yet, between 2004 and 2009, the Supercession Executive stated that “they were woefully over in number” in some commands, with “12, 15 plus to a sergeant.” \[...]

Chief Thomson ultimately commented that one of the most pressing problems facing the department when he took over in 2008 was a “culture of apathy and lethargy”—by which he meant that there were no “mechanisms of accountability,” and, as such, “CPD was an organization in which you could have the greatest cop in the world or the laziest cop in the world ....” \[...]

Fifth, Officers Parry and Stetser were aware of the alleged inadequacies in supervision. Officer Parry explained that he continued to engage in illicit behavior even when Sergeant Morris could no longer cover for him as his supervisor. When asked whether he was concerned that a Sergeant who was not a party to the conspiracy would “discover what was going on,” Officer Parry responded, “No. ... Because, like I said, nobody seemed to care.” \[...] He noted that, in fact, supervision was worse after Sergeant Morris stopped supervising him, stating:

> Because the more sergeants had to do, the more that—you know, the more paperwork that had to be completed for our squad, the less they were on the street and there was no supervision for them ... \[B]ecause before if you were on regular patrol, if you were at a job, a sergeant was on the street with you. They would show up a lot of times. Sergeants were getting so, you know, backed up with paperwork, they were really never around. ... These guys, like I said, they would take their liberties because they knew that nobody was going to be around and they had to answer no questions.

\[...] And when Sergeant Morris was their supervisor, Officer Parry testified that he and Officer Stetser had no concern about their misconduct, as it was very rare that a Captain or Lieutenant would show up or review their reports. Nor did concern about complaints being filed with Internal Affairs ever cross their mind. Worse yet, Officer Stetser also testified that, Lieutenant Pike, his supervisor at one point, “most likely” knew that he was writing false reports and accepted them. \[...]

Sixth, Officer Vautier, a fellow officer at the time, testified about two incidents in which Officer Stetser engaged in questionable behavior in front of his superiors without reprimand. The first took place in Spring of 2007 when Officer Stetser put drugs in a Lieutenant’s bag in front of the entire squad as a prank. According to the officer, the Lieutenant discovered this and did nothing. The officer also testified that he reported this, as well as that Officer Stetser bragged about passing out drugs at parties, to a Sergeant within Internal Affairs. The Sergeant responded by confirming that there had been other complaints about Officer Stetser’s passing out drugs at parties, but never wrote anything down and kept the report off the record. The second incident was in May of 2007, and involved a Sergeant who conducted an integrity test on Officer Stetser, whereby he placed a precise amount of an illegal substance in a bag and handed it to Officer Stetser to turn it in before the end of the day. Officer Stetser failed—he was given 45 bags and only turned in 30.

\[...]

## II. Discussion

\[...] At summary judgment, he argues that the District Court erred in granting Camden’s motion on any portion of his § 1983 claim. \[...]

We agree that there were several errors below \[...]. We will therefore reverse the portions of the District Court’s summary judgment and evidentiary rulings that resulted in error, \[...] and remand for further proceedings.

### A. Summary Judgment

#### \[1. Elements of a § 1983 claim]

\[A]§ 1983 claim against a municipality may proceed in two ways. _Estate of Roman v. City of Newark_, 914 F.3d 789, 798–99 (3d Cir. 2019). A plaintiff may put forth that an unconstitutional policy or custom of the municipality led to his or her injuries, _id._ at 798 (citing _Monell v. Dep’t of Soc. Servs._, 436 U.S. 658, 694 (1978)), or that they were caused by a failure or inadequacy by the municipality that “reflects a deliberate or conscious choice,” _see id._ (internal quotation marks omitted) \[...]. The latter avenue arose in the failure-to-train context, but applies to other failures and inadequacies by municipalities, including those related to supervision and discipline of its police officers. _Id._ at 798–99 (“\[Plaintiff] has not pled a municipal policy ... \[but] has ... adequately pled that the City failed to train, supervise, and discipline its police officers.”).

Plaintiffs that proceed under a municipal policy or custom theory must make showings that are not required of those who proceed under a failure or inadequacy theory, and vice versa. Notably, an unconstitutional municipal policy or custom is necessary for the former theory, but not for the latter, failure or inadequacy theory. _Id._ at 798 (“\[F]or failure-to-train claims ...\[,] a plaintiff need not allege an unconstitutional policy.”) \[...]). This difference can be significant because a plaintiff presenting an unconstitutional policy must point to an official proclamation, policy or edict by a decisionmaker possessing final authority to establish municipal policy on the relevant subject. And, if alleging a custom, the plaintiff must evince a given course of conduct so well-settled and permanent as to virtually constitute law. \[...] On the other hand, one whose claim is predicated on a failure or inadequacy has the separate, but equally demanding requirement of demonstrating a failure or inadequacy amounting to deliberate indifference on the part of the municipality. \[...] This consists of a showing as to whether (1) municipal policymakers know that employees will confront a particular situation, (2) the situation involves a difficult choice or a history of employees mishandling, and (3) the wrong choice by an employee will frequently cause deprivation of constitutional rights. \[...]

Although we have acknowledged the close relationship between policy-and-custom claims and failure-or-inadequacy claims, \[...] the avenues remain distinct: a plaintiff alleging that a policy or custom led to his or her injuries must be referring to an unconstitutional policy or custom, and a plaintiff alleging failure-to-supervise, train, or discipline must show that said failure amounts to deliberate indifference to the constitutional rights of those affected. That is not to say that the plaintiffs cannot be one and the same, with claims sounding in both. They can. _See Estate of Roman v. City of Newark_ at 798–99 (“\[Plaintiff] has sufficiently alleged a custom of warrantless or nonconsensual searches ... \[and] has also adequately pled that the City failed to train, supervise, and discipline its officers.”).

#### 2. Analysis

\[...]

We will reverse the District Court’s grant of summary judgment on the failure to supervise theory, and, to the extent that it overlooked Forrest’s allegations regarding the training supervisors received, also its ruling on the failure to train theory.

_**a. Failure to Supervise**_

The evidence presented by Forrest may convince a reasonable jury that Camden’s failure to supervise and discipline its officers amounted to deliberate indifference to the rights of individuals with whom those officers would come into contact. The record would support a finding that Camden’s policymakers knew that their officers would require supervision, that there was a history of officer supervision being mishandled, and that, in the absence of such supervision, constitutional violations were likely to result. Indeed, the evidence suggesting that the particular officers at issue engaged in illicit conduct—often consisting of false arrest and excessive force—knowing that that they were not being supervised, and that there were a few incidents that should have alerted the officers’ superiors, but did not, is significant. Those evidentiary points combined with the NJAG reports, the evidence regarding Internal Affairs’ complaint backlog and other deficiencies, and the testimonies offered by Chief Thomson, the Supercession Executive, former Deputy Chief Hargis, and the Sergeant who took over Internal Affairs in 2009, is sufficient to withstand a motion for summary judgment.

Camden argues that Forrest cannot demonstrate a nexus between the deprivation he suffered and Camden’s conduct because, in the months leading up to Forrest’s arrest, its hands were tied. To support that argument, it cites its internal processes: when Internal Affairs received a complaint, it forwarded that complaint to the Camden County Prosecutor’s Office (“CCPO”), and took no further action. \[...] It left the investigation entirely up to the CCPO. \[...] Camden asserts that this process was in effect with respect to Officers Stetser and Parry in 2008, and, as such, Internal Affairs’s investigations of those officers were stayed up to and through the time of Forrest’s arrest. \[...]

We reject this argument for two reasons. First, \[...] Camden’s own submission demonstrates that the CCPO did not take over investigations into Officers Stetser and Parry until September 16, 2008, well over two months after Forrest’s arrest. \[...] Second, even assuming that was not the case, there is a genuine dispute of material fact as to whether Internal Affairs’s investigation would have resulted in Forrest’s arrest (and the surrounding incident) being prevented. Indeed, even when Camden did investigate complaints against these officers, its investigation amounted to a review of the false reports they prepared, and thus resulted in no disciplinary action against the officers.

We will therefore reverse the District Court’s decision granting summary judgment as to the § 1983 claim that Camden’s failure to supervise its officers amounted to deliberate indifference to the rights of individuals with whom those officers would come into contact.

_**b. Failure to Train**_

As to the failure to train theory, Forrest’s arguments to the District Court did not only focus on the training Officers Stetser and Parry received, but also the training that supervising officers received \[(... arguing that “training session\[s] for officers, supervisors and command officers about how to recognize and eradicate excessive force and misconduct \[are] necessary”)]. Forrest reiterates the same two-part argument on appeal: that “the training provided to Stetser and Parry ... was inadequate” and “\[s]imilarly, training for supervisors was deficient, as sergeants did not receive training geared toward officer discipline.” \[...]

We agree with the District Court that evidence regarding the training that officers received is insufficient as a matter of law. The alleged deficiency in a training program must be closely related to the alleged constitutional injury because “\[i]n virtually every instance where a person has had his or her constitutional rights violated by a city employee, \[said] plaintiff will be able to point to something the city ‘could have done’ to prevent the unfortunate incident.” _City of Canton, Ohio v. Harris_, 489 U.S. 378, 392 (1989).

Here, even if we accept that, based on the sheer volume of complaints, Camden had to have known that it had a problem with officers violating the constitutional rights of citizens, the link between that and the alleged deficiencies in the training program is simply too tenuous. The officers knew that their conduct was criminal, and, as the encounter in this case shows, used their authority to pressure victims to refrain from immediately reporting their activities. As a result, there is no proof from which to infer that implementing the changes to the training program that Forrest suggests would have made any difference. Lastly, in terms of awareness, the testimonial evidence from higher officials point to supervision and accountability as the critical issues, not training.

The opposite is true of the evidence regarding the inadequacies in training that supervisors received. Camden policymakers knew or should have known that supervisor-level officers would be confronted with officer misconduct, whether first hand or via complaints and reports from others, and that the wrong choice—failure to report or admonish—would lead to the sort of behavior that occurred here: officers whose behavior caused the deprivation of constitutional rights, but who had no reason to change that behavior. And, although the situation does not necessarily involve a difficult choice, the evidence here demonstrates a genuine dispute of material fact as to whether supervisors had a history of mishandling this choice.

Indeed, the sheer volume of complaints from outsiders, coupled with the absence of any internal response may lead a reasonable jury to conclude that Camden was aware of supervisors mishandling or being unable to handle their duties. This is even more pronounced when one examines the testimonies of higher officials who expressed great concern that officers were not being adequately supervised, and called for various measures to address that reality, including a formal performance evaluation system and a reduction in the supervisor-to-officer ratio. _See also_ App. 128 (warning that Camden’s failure to commit manpower and resources to proactively managing police misconduct would place it “in the position of failing to adequately protect the civil rights of its citizens and set the stage for significant civil liability.”).

The call for these measures was warranted and the need for training apparent. The testimony provided by Officers Stetser and Parry reflects that they were aware that supervision was lacking, whether co-conspirator Sergeant Morris covered for them or not. Officer Stetser, in particular, explained that one of his supervisors “most likely” knew that he was writing false reports, and accepted them. \[...] The record further provides ample basis for this confidence. Recall that Officer Stetser failed an integrity test administered by a supervising officer, and pranked another by planting drugs in the supervising officer’s bag. When this was reported to a Sergeant in Internal Affairs, the Sergeant merely responded with his own account of similar behavior by Officer Stetser in other contexts. _See Supra_ Section I.C., Segment Six.

The foregoing demonstrates Camden’s policymakers were aware that Camden needed a large shake up in its supervisory regime. It also raises significant questions as to whether Camden’s supervisor-level officers were adequately trained on how to discipline and combat officer misconduct when it was brought to their attention, including the kinds of misconduct—false arrest and excessive force—that led to Forrest’s injuries. Thus, while we agree that Forrest’s claim regarding the adequacy of the training officers received fails on causation grounds, we conclude that a genuine dispute of material fact exists as to whether the need for more or different training for supervisors was obvious, and the failure to provide that was very likely to result in a violation of constitutional rights. We will therefore reverse the District Court’s summary judgment ruling as to this iteration of Forrest’s § 1983 claim.

\[...]

### C. Jury Instruction Errors

Forrest did not object to the instructions provided to the jury. The errors he alleges here have therefore not been preserved. \[Thus,] we reverse only if the error is “(1) fundamental and highly prejudicial or if the instructions are such that the jury is without adequate guidance on a fundamental question and (2) our refusal to consider the issue would result in a miscarriage of justice.” \[...] We therefore proceed by first considering whether the District Court committed an error, and if so, whether the error meets the threshold for reversal.

The jury instructions errors are twofold: first, the instructions confuse the jury as to the legal requirements for each species of § 1983 liability, and, second, it narrows the jury’s focus to only evidence pertaining to Internal Affairs and Officers Stetser and Parry.

Per the former, recall that the onus of demonstrating an official policy or custom only falls on a plaintiff whose municipal liability claim is predicated on an unconstitutional policy or custom, but that such a plaintiff need not show deliberate indifference on the part of the municipality. On the other hand, a plaintiff advancing a claim predicated on a municipality’s failure or inadequacy in training, supervision, or otherwise is spared from demonstrating the existence of an unconstitutional policy or custom but must make the deliberate indifference showing. To the contrary, the jury here was incorrectly instructed that, in order to find a municipal liability for inadequate supervision, it had to find that Camden adopted a policy or custom of inadequate supervision amounting to deliberate indifference to the fact that it would “obviously result in the violation of an individual’s right to be free from unlawful arrest and excessive force.”

Indeed, in relevant part, the instructions begin by stating that the jury must find “that an official policy or custom of \[Internal Affairs] caused the deprivation \[of his constitutional rights].” \[...] And, after presenting the requirements for determining whether a policy or custom existed, it frames Forrest’s claim as “\[Camden] adopted a policy of inadequate supervision and that this policy caused the violation of \[Forrest’s] right\[s] ....” \[...] It then immediately follows with instructions that the jury must also find that Internal Affairs failed to adequately supervise Officers Stetser and Parry, and that said supervision amounted to deliberate indifference. \[...] The result is confusion as to whether the policy or custom finding is antecedent to reaching the deliberate indifference inquiry, or if the two are intertwined in some other way.

Per the second error, the instructions frame the case as solely pertaining to the adequacy of Internal Affairs’s supervision of Officers Stetser and Parry, rather than the adequacy of Camden’s supervision and investigation of its officers in general. Specifically, the instructions state that,

> In order to hold the municipality liable for the violation of \[Forrest’s constitutional rights] ..., you must find that \[Forrest] has ... proved by preponderance of the evidence ... \[that] \[f]irst, \[Internal Affairs] failed to adequately supervise _Stetser_ and _Parry_. Second, \[Internal Affairs]’s failure to supervise _Stetser_ and _Parry_ amounted to deliberate indifference .... Third, \[Internal Affairs]’s failure to adequately supervise\[ ] proximately cause\[d] the violation ...

\[...] Further, in instructing the jury on the elements of deliberate indifference, the Court again directed the jury to examine whether “\[Internal Affairs] knew that Jason Stetser and Kevin Parry would confront a particular situation.” \[...]

In contrast, the legal requirement for deliberate indifference is whether “(1) municipal policymakers know that _employees_ will confront a particular situation; (2) the situation involves a difficult choice or a history of employees mishandling; and (3) the wrong choice by an employee will frequently cause deprivation of constitutional rights.” \[...] It is not narrowed to the particular employees in the case. Notably, as the record makes clear, the Chief of Police had ultimate authority over Camden’s police department and Internal Affairs but is not properly considered within Internal Affairs. We therefore conclude that the instructions provided to the jury regarding Forrest’s § 1983 claim constituted error.

We also conclude that both errors meet the threshold for reversal. The District Court’s instructions narrowed the universe of evidence that the jury could rely on to only evidence that pertained to Internal Affairs’ supervision of Officers Stetser and Parry, to the exclusion of its broader investigatory inadequacies. It also left the jury without guidance on the fundamental question of what it needed to find to conclude that Camden was or was not liable. Our failure to consider either error would result in a miscarriage of justice. We therefore consider both. As Part 3 of the jury verdict is the only aspect that concerned Camden’s liability under § 1983, we will vacate that aspect of the verdict.

\[Footnotes omitted.]
