# Washington v. Glucksberg

521 U.S. 702 (1997)

United States Supreme Court

#### WASHINGTON et al. v. GLUCKSBERG et al. <a href="#gsl_case_name" id="gsl_case_name"></a>

\[...]

Chief Justice Rehnquist delivered the opinion of the Court.

The question presented in this case is whether Washington's prohibition against "caus\[ing]" or "aid\[ing]" a suicide offends the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. We hold that it does not.

It has always been a crime to assist a suicide in the State of Washington. In 1854, Washington's first Territorial Legislature outlawed "assisting another in the commission of self-murder."[\[1\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[2]) Today, [Washington law](#user-content-fn-1)[^1] provides: "A person is guilty of promoting a suicide attempt when he knowingly causes or aids another person to attempt suicide." Promoting a suicide attempt" is a felony, punishable by up to [five years' imprisonment and up to a $10,000 fine](#user-content-fn-2)[^2]. At the same time, Washington's [Natural Death Act](#user-content-fn-3)[^3], enacted in 1979, states that the "withholding or withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment" at a patient's direction "shall not, for any purpose, constitute a suicide." [\[2\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[3])

Petitioners in this case are the State of Washington and its Attorney General. Respondents Harold Glucksberg, M. D., Abigail Halperin, M. D., Thomas A. Preston, M. D., and Peter Shalit, M. D., are physicians who practice in Washington. These doctors occasionally treat terminally ill, suffering patients, and declare that they would assist these patients in ending their lives if not for Washington's assisted-suicide ban.[\[3\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[4]) In January 1994, respondents, along with three gravely ill, pseudonymous plaintiffs who have since died and Compassion in Dying, a nonprofit organization that counsels people considering physician-assisted suicide, sued in the United States District Court, seeking a declaration that the \[[state law prohibiting assisted suicide](#user-content-fn-1)[^1]] is, on its face, unconstitutional.[\[4\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[5])

The plaintiffs asserted "the existence of a liberty interest protected by the Fourteenth Amendment which extends to a personal choice by a mentally competent, terminally ill adult to commit physician-assisted suicide." Relying primarily on [_Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa._ v. _Casey_ ](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=6298856056242550994\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50)and [_Cruzan_ v. _Director, Mo. Dept. of Health_,](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50) the District Court agreed and concluded that Washington's assisted-suicide ban is unconstitutional because it "places an undue burden on the exercise of \[that] constitutionally protected liberty interest."[\[5\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[6]) The District Court also decided that the Washington statute violated the Equal Protection Clause's requirement that "\`all persons similarly situated . . . be treated alike.' "

A panel of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed, emphasizing that "\[i]n the two hundred and five years of our existence no constitutional right to aid in killing oneself has ever been asserted and upheld by a court of final jurisdiction." \[...] The Ninth Circuit reheard the case en banc, reversed the panel's decision, and affirmed the District Court. Like the District Court, the en banc Court of Appeals emphasized our _Casey_ and _Cruzan_ decisions. The court also discussed what it described as "historical" and "current societal attitudes" toward suicide and assisted suicide and concluded that "the Constitution encompasses a due process liberty interest in controlling the time and manner of one's death—that there is, in short, a constitutionally-recognized \`right to die.' " After "\[w]eighing and then balancing" this interest against Washington's various interests, the court held that the State's assisted-suicide ban was unconstitutional "as applied to terminally ill competent adults who wish to hasten their deaths with medication prescribed by their physicians."[\[6\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[7]) The court did not reach the District Court's equal protection holding.[\[7\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[8]) We granted certiorari and now reverse.

## I

We begin, as we do in all due process cases, by examining our Nation's history, legal traditions, and practices. \[...] In almost every State—indeed, in almost every western democracy—it is a crime to assist a suicide.[\[8\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[9]) The States' assisted-suicide bans are not innovations. Rather, they are longstanding expressions of the States' commitment to the protection and preservation of all human life. [_Cruzan_ at 280](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#p280) ("\[T]he States—indeed, all civilized nations—demonstrate their commitment to life by treating homicide as a serious crime. Moreover, the majority of States in this country have laws imposing criminal penalties on one who assists another to commit suicide"). \[...] Indeed, opposition to and condemnation of suicide—and, therefore, of assisting suicide—are consistent and enduring themes of our philosophical, legal, and cultural heritages. See generally Marzen 17-56; [New York State Task Force on Life and the Law, When Death is Sought: Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia in the Medical Context 77-82 (May 1994)](#user-content-fn-4)[^4] (hereinafter New York Task Force).

More specifically, for over 700 years, the Anglo-American common-law tradition has punished or otherwise disapproved of both suicide and assisting suicide.[\[9\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[10]) \[...] In the 13th century, Henry de Bracton, one of the first legal-treatise writers, observed that "\[j]ust as a man may commit felony by slaying another so may he do so by slaying himself." \[...] \[The] principle that suicide of a sane person, for whatever reason, was a punishable felony was . . . introduced into English common law."[\[10\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[11]) Centuries later, Sir William Blackstone, whose [Commentaries on the Laws of England](https://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/sharswood-commentaries-on-the-laws-of-england-in-four-books-vol-1) not only provided a definitive summary of the common law but was also a primary legal authority for 18th- and 19th-century American lawyers, \[...] emphasized that "the law has . . . ranked \[suicide] among the highest crimes," although, anticipating later developments, he conceded that the harsh and shameful punishments imposed for suicide "borde\[r] a little upon severity." \[...]

For the most part, the early American Colonies adopted the common-law approach. \[...] Over time, however, the American Colonies abolished these harsh common-law penalties. William Penn abandoned the criminal-forfeiture sanction in Pennsylvania in 1701, and the other Colonies (and later, the other States) eventually followed this example. [_Cruzan, supra,_ at 294](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8467471114673973761\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#p294) (Scalia, J., concurring).

\[... The] movement away from the common law's harsh sanctions did not represent an acceptance of suicide; rather, \[...] this change reflected the growing consensus that it was unfair to punish the suicide's family for his wrongdoing. \[...] Nonetheless, although States moved away from Blackstone's treatment of suicide, courts continued to condemn it as a grave public wrong. \[...]

That suicide remained a grievous, though nonfelonious, wrong is confirmed by the fact that colonial and early state legislatures and courts did not retreat from prohibiting assisting suicide. \[Former Chief Justice of the Connecticut, Zephaniah Swift] stated that "\[i]f one counsels another to commit suicide, and the other by reason of the advice kills himself, the advisor is guilty of murder as principal." \[...] This was the well-established common-law view \[...], as was the similar principle that the consent of a homicide victim is "wholly immaterial to the guilt of the person who cause\[d] \[his death]." \[...] And the prohibitions against assisting suicide never contained exceptions for those who were near death. Rather, "\[t]he life of those to whom life ha\[d] become a burden—of those who \[were] hopelessly diseased or fatally wounded—nay, even the lives of criminals condemned to death, \[were] under the protection of the law, equally as the lives of those who \[were] in the full tide of life's enjoyment, and anxious to continue to live." \[...]

\[...]

Though deeply rooted, the States' assisted-suicide bans have in recent years been reexamined and, generally, reaffirmed. Because of advances in medicine and technology, Americans today are increasingly likely to die in institutions, from chronic illnesses. \[...] Public concern and democratic action are therefore sharply focused on how best to protect dignity and independence at the end of life,with the result that there have been many significant changes in state laws and in the attitudes these laws reflect. Many States, for example, now permit "living wills," surrogate health-care decisionmaking, and the withdrawal or refusal of life-sustaining medical treatment.

The Washington statute at issue in this case was enacted in 1975 as part of a revision of that State's criminal code. Four years later, Washington passed its Natural Death Act, which specifically stated that the "withholding or withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment . . . shall not, for any purpose, constitute a suicide" and that "\[n]othing in this chapter shall be construed to condone, authorize, or approve mercy killing . . . ." \[...]

\[...]

Thus, the States are currently engaged in serious, thoughtful examinations of physician-assisted suicide and other similar issues. For example, New York State's Task Force on Life and the Law—an ongoing, blue-ribbon commission composed of doctors, ethicists, lawyers, religious leaders, and interested laymen—was convened in 1984 and commissioned with "a broad mandate to recommend public policy on issues raised by medical advances." Over the past decade, the Task Force has recommended laws relating to end-of-life decisions, surrogate pregnancy, and organ donation. After studying physician-assisted suicide, however, the Task Force unanimously concluded that "\[l]egalizing assisted suicide and euthanasia would pose profound risks to many individuals who are ill and vulnerable. . . . \[T]he potential dangers of this dramatic change in public policy would outweigh any benefit that might be achieved."

Attitudes toward suicide itself have changed \[over time], but our laws have consistently condemned, and continue to prohibit, assisting suicide. Despite changes in medical technology and notwithstanding an increased emphasis on the importance of end-of-life decisionmaking, we have not retreated from this prohibition. Against this backdrop of history, tradition, and practice, we now turn to respondents' constitutional claim.

## II

The Due Process Clause guarantees more than fair process, and the "liberty" it protects includes more than the absence of physical restraint. \[...] In a long line of cases, we have held that, in addition to the specific freedoms protected by the Bill of Rights, the "liberty" specially protected by the Due Process Clause includes the rights to marry \[...]; to have children \[...]; to direct the education and upbringing of one's children \[...]; to marital privacy \[...]; \[and] to bodily integrity \[...]. We have also assumed, and strongly suggested, that the Due Process Clause protects the traditional right to refuse unwanted life saving medical treatment. \[...]

But we "ha\[ve] always been reluctant to expand the concept of substantive due process because guide posts for responsible decision making in this unchartered area are scarce and open-ended." \[...] By extending constitutional protection to an asserted right or liberty interest, we, to a great extent, place the matter outside the arena of public debate and legislative action. \[...]

Our established method of substantive-due-process analysis has two primary features: First, we have regularly observed that the Due Process Clause specially protects those fundamental rights and liberties which are, objectively, deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition. Second, we have required in substantive-due-process cases a "careful description" of the asserted fundamental liberty interest. \[...] Our Nation's history, legal traditions, and practices thus provide the crucial "guide posts for responsible decisionmaking" that direct and restrain our exposition of the Due Process Clause. As we stated recently in _Flores,_ the Fourteenth Amendment "forbids the government to infringe . . . \`fundamental' liberty interests _at all,_ no matter what process is provided, unless the infringement is narrowly tailored to serve a compelling state interest." \[...]

\[...]

Turning to the claim at issue here, the Court of Appeals stated that "\[p]roperly analyzed, the first issue to be resolved is whether there is a liberty interest in determining the time and manner of one's death," or, in other words, "\[i]s there a right to die?" \[...] Similarly, respondents assert a "liberty to choose how to die" and a right to "control of one's final days \[...] and describe the asserted liberty as "the right to choose a humane, dignified death" \[...] and "the liberty to shape death" \[...] As noted above, we have a tradition of carefully formulating the interest at stake in substantive due process cases. \[... Thus], the question before us is whether the "liberty" specially protected by the Due Process Clause includes a right to commit suicide which itself includes a right to assistance in doing so.[\[18\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[19])

We now inquire whether this asserted right has any place in our Nation's traditions. \[We] are confronted with a consistent and almost universal tradition that has long rejected the asserted right, and continues explicitly to reject it today, even for terminally ill, mentally competent adults. To hold for respondents, we would have to reverse centuries of legal doctrine and practice, and strike down the considered policy choice of almost every State. \[...]

\[...]

In _Cruzan,_ we \[...] concluded that, notwithstanding \[the right to direct or refuse the withdrawal of death-prolonging procedures], the Constitution permitted Missouri to require clear and convincing evidence of an incompetent patient's wishes concerning the withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment.

\[...]

The right assumed in _Cruzan,_ however, was not simply deduced from abstract concepts of personal autonomy. Given the common-law rule that forced medication was a battery, and the long legal tradition protecting the decision to refuse unwanted medical treatment, our assumption was entirely consistent with this Nation's history and constitutional traditions. The decision to commit suicide with the assistance of another may be just as personal and profound as the decision to refuse unwanted medical treatment, but it has never enjoyed similar legal protection. Indeed, the two acts are widely and reasonably regarded as quite distinct.In _Cruzan_ itself, we recognized that most States outlawed assisted suicide—and even more do today—and we certainly gave no intimation that the right to refuse unwanted medical treatment could be somehow transmuted into a right to assistance in committing suicide.

Respondents also rely on _Casey._ There, the Court's opinion concluded that "the essential holding of _Roe_ v. _Wade_ \[, 410 U. S. 113 (1973),] should be retained and once again reaffirmed." We held, first, that a woman has a [right, before her fetus is viable, to an abortion](#user-content-fn-5)[^5] \[but subject to legitimate state interests in protecting the woman's health and that of the unborn child.] In reaching this conclusion, the opinion discussed in some detail this Court's substantive-due-process tradition of interpreting the Due Process Clause to protect certain fundamental rights and "personal decisions relating to marriage, procreation, contraception, family relationships, child rearing, and education," and noted that many of those rights and liberties "involv\[e] the most intimate and personal choices a person may make in a lifetime." [_Casey,_ at 851](#user-content-fn-6)[^6].

The Court of Appeals, like the District Court, found _Casey_ "\`highly instructive' " and "\`almost prescriptive' " for determining "\`what liberty interest may inhere in a terminally ill person's choice to commit suicide'":

> "Like the decision of whether or not to have an abortion, the decision how and when to die is one of \`the most intimate and personal choices a person may make in a lifetime,' a choice \`central to personal dignity and autonomy.'" \[...]

Similarly, respondents emphasize the statement in _Casey_ that:

> "At the heart of liberty is the right to define one's own concept of existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of human life. Beliefs about these matters could not define the attributes of personhood were they formed under compulsion of the State." \[...]

By choosing this language, the Court's opinion in _Casey_ described, in a general way and in light of our prior cases, those personal activities and decisions that this Court has identified as so deeply rooted in our history and traditions, or so fundamental to our concept of constitutionally ordered liberty, that they are protected by the Fourteenth Amendment.[\[19\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[20]) The opinion moved from the recognition that liberty necessarily includes freedom of conscience and belief about ultimate considerations to the observation that "though the abortion decision may originate within the zone of conscience and belief, it is _more than a philosophic exercise._" \[...] That many of the rights and liberties protected by the Due Process Clause sound in personal autonomy does not warrant the sweeping conclusion that any and all important, intimate, and personal decisions are so protected \[...] and _Casey_ did not suggest otherwise.

The history of the law's treatment of assisted suicide in this country has been and continues to be one of the rejection of nearly all efforts to permit it. That being the case, our decisions lead us to conclude that the asserted "right" to assistance in committing suicide is not a fundamental liberty interest protected by the Due Process Clause. The Constitution also requires, however, that Washington's assisted suicide ban be rationally related to legitimate government interests. This requirement is unquestionably met here. As the court below recognized, Washington's assisted-suicide ban implicates a number of state interests.[\[21\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[22])

First, Washington has an "unqualified interest in the preservation of human life." \[...] The State's prohibition on assisted suicide, like all homicide laws, both reflects and advances its commitment to this interest. \[...][\[22\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[23]) This interest is symbolic and aspirational as well as practical:

> "While suicide is no longer prohibited or penalized, the ban against assisted suicide and euthanasia shores up the notion of limits in human relationships. It reflects the gravity with which we view the decision to take one's own life or the life of another, and our reluctance to encourage or promote these decisions." \[...]

\[...] As we have previously affirmed, the States "may properly decline to make judgments about the \`quality' of life that a particular individual may enjoy." \[...] This remains true, as _Cruzan_ makes clear, even for those who are near death.

Relatedly, all admit that suicide is a serious public-health problem, especially among persons in otherwise vulnerable groups. \[...] The State has an interest in preventing suicide, and in studying, identifying, and treating its causes. \[...]

Those who attempt suicide—terminally ill or not—often suffer from depression or other mental disorders. \[...] Research indicates, however, that many people who request physician-assisted suicide withdraw that request if their depression and pain are treated. \[...] The New York Task Force, however, expressed its concern that, because depression is difficult to diagnose, physicians and medical professionals often fail to respond adequately to seriously ill patients' needs. Thus, legal physician-assisted suicide could make it more difficult for the State to protect depressed or mentally ill persons, or those who are suffering from untreated pain, from suicidal impulses.

The State also has an interest in protecting the integrity and ethics of the medical profession. In contrast to the Court of Appeals' conclusion that "the integrity of the medical profession would \[not] be threatened in any way by \[physician-assisted suicide]," the American Medical Association, like many other medical and physicians' groups, has concluded that "\[p]hysician-assisted suicide is fundamentally incompatible with the physician's role as healer." \[...] And physician-assisted suicide could, it is argued, undermine the trust that is essential to the doctor-patient relationship by blurring the time-honored line between healing and harming. \[...]

Next, the State has an interest in protecting vulnerable groups—including the poor, the elderly, and disabled persons—from abuse, neglect, and mistakes. The Court of Appeals dismissed the State's concern that disadvantaged persons might be pressured into physician-assisted suicide as "ludicrous on its face." \[...] We have recognized, however, the real risk of subtle coercion and undue influence in end-of-life situations. Similarly, the New York Task Force warned that "\[l]egalizing physician-assisted suicide would pose profound risks to many individuals who are ill and vulnerable. . . . The risk of harm is greatest for the many individuals in our society whose autonomy and well-being are already compromised by poverty, lack of access to good medical care, advanced age, or membership in a stigmatized social group." \[...] If physician-assisted suicide were permitted, many might resort to it to spare their families the substantial financial burden of end-of-life health-care costs.

The State's interest here goes beyond protecting the vulnerable from coercion; it extends to protecting disabled and terminally ill people from prejudice, negative and inaccurate stereotypes, and "societal indifference." \[...] The State's assisted-suicide ban reflects and reinforces its policy that the lives of terminally ill, disabled, and elderly people must be no less valued than the lives of the young and healthy, and that a seriously disabled person's suicidal impulses should be interpreted and treated the same way as anyone else's. \[...]

Finally, the State may fear that permitting assisted suicide will start it down the path to voluntary and perhaps even involuntary euthanasia. The Court of Appeals struck down Washington's assisted-suicide ban only "as applied to competent, terminally ill adults who wish to hasten their deaths by obtaining medication prescribed by their doctors." Washington insists, however, that the impact of the court's decision will not and cannot be so limited. If suicide is protected as a matter of constitutional right, it is argued, "every man and woman in the United States must enjoy it." [_Compassion in_](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=7885185689008897956\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#p591) [_Dying,_ at 591](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=7885185689008897956\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#p591); see [_Kevorkian,_ 527 N. W. 2d, at 727-728, n. 41](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=15777514628045960849\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#r\[41]). The Court of Appeals' decision, and its expansive reasoning, provide ample support for the State's concerns. The court noted, for example, that the "decision of a duly appointed surrogate decision maker is for all legal purposes the decision of the patient himself"; that "in some instances, the patient may be unable to self-administer the drugs and . . . administration by the physician . . . may be the only way the patient may be able to receive them"; and that not only physicians, but also family members and loved ones, will inevitably participate in assisting suicide. Thus, it turns out that what is couched as a limited right to "physician-assisted suicide" is likely, in effect, a much broader license, which could prove extremely difficult to police and contain.[\[23\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[24]) Washington's ban on assisting suicide prevents such erosion.

This concern is further supported by evidence about the practice of euthanasia in the Netherlands. \[...] The New York Task Force, citing the Dutch experience, observed that "assisted suicide and euthanasia are closely linked," and concluded that the "risk of . . . abuse is neither speculative nor distant." Washington, like most other States, reasonably ensures against this risk by banning, rather than regulating, assisted suicide. \[...]

We need not weigh exactingly the relative strengths of these various interests. They are unquestionably important and legitimate, and Washington's ban on assisted suicide is at least reasonably related to their promotion and protection. We therefore hold that \[Washington's statutee] does not violate the Fourteenth Amendment, either on its face or "as applied to competent, terminally ill adults who wish to hasten their deaths by obtaining medication prescribed by their doctors." \[...][\[24\]](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50#\[25])

\[...]

Throughout the Nation, Americans are engaged in an earnest and profound debate about the morality, legality, and practicality of physician-assisted suicide. Our holding permits this debate to continue, as it should in a democratic society. The decision of the en banc Court of Appeals is reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.

_It is so ordered._

\[Concurring opinions omitted.]

***

Tags: autonomy, self-determination, constitutional rights, right of privacy, right to refuse treatment, right to refuse medical treatment, withdrawal of treatment, right to die, competence, quality of life, advanced directive, living will, physician-assisted suicide, suicide, euthanasia

***

<details>

<summary><mark style="color:red;">Editorial Notes,</mark> <mark style="color:red;"><strong>Attributions, and Licensing</strong></mark></summary>

Editing to the [original](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=17920279791882194984\&q=521+U.S.+702\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50), excluding any original footnotes (hyperlinked or otherwise), by Matthew L. Mac Kelly. Many of the court's citations to authorities have been omitted for length and readability purposes. Otherwise, elisions are identified by bracketed ellipses (e.g., \[...]), several of which reveal elided text by clicking on inline annotation indicators (e.g., \[...]). Judicial decisions and annotations thereto are not subject to copyright protection and are in the public domain. _See, e.g., Georgia v. Public.Resource.Org, Inc_., [140 S. Ct. 1498](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8288711378870515248\&q=Georgia+et+al.+v.+Public.Resource.Org,+Inc.\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50) (2020). This page is in the public domain.

</details>

[^1]: Wash. Rev. Code § 9A.36.060(1) (1994)

[^2]: §§ 9A.36.060(2) and 9A.20.021(1)(c)

[^3]: Wash. Rev. Code § 70.122.070(1)

[^4]: Summary [here](https://dredf.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/Risks_of_Legalization.pdf).

[^5]: Note: In [_Dobbs v. Jackson Women's_](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=15560296770592570126\&q=dobbs+v+jackson+health+organization\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50)

    [_Health Org_](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=15560296770592570126\&q=dobbs+v+jackson+health+organization\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50)., 597 U.S. 215 (2022), the U.S. Supreme Court overruled _Roe_ and _Casey_'s affirmations that an abortion prior to viability is a constitutional right.

[^6]: Despite _Roe_ and _Casey_ being overruled, [_Dobbs_ ](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=15560296770592570126\&q=dobbs+v+jackson+health+organization\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50)did not overrule the constitutional principle that _Casey_ stated here.
