# Preliminary Discussion

We have seen that police are often allowed to conduct warrantless arrests as long as they have probable cause to believe the arrestee has committed a crime. The leading Supreme Court case affirming this principle is _United States v. Watson_, [423 U.S. 411](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=15857342701216948043\&q=423+U.S.+411\&hl=en\&as_sdt=6,50) (1976).

## _United States v. Watson_ Factual Summary&#x20;

The relevant events began on August 17, 1972, when an informant, one Khoury, telephoned a postal inspector informing him that respondent Watson was in possession of a stolen credit card and had asked Khoury to cooperate in using the card to their mutual advantage. On five to 10 previous occasions Khoury had provided the inspector with reliable information on postal inspection matters, some involving Watson. Later that day Khoury delivered the card to the inspector. On learning that Watson had agreed to furnish additional cards, the inspector asked Khoury to arrange to meet with Watson. Khoury did so, a meeting being scheduled for August 22. Watson canceled that engagement, but at noon on August 23, Khoury met with Watson at a restaurant designated by the latter. Khoury had been instructed that if Watson had additional stolen credit cards, Khoury was to give a designated signal. The signal was given, the officers closed in, and Watson was forthwith arrested.

After his arrest, Watson consented to a search of his car that revealed incriminating evidence. He later moved to suppress the evidence on the ground that his consent was obtained after an unlawful arrest.&#x20;

## How the Court Considered the Arrest

Contrary to the Court of Appeals’ view, Watson’s arrest was not invalid because executed without a warrant.[ Title 18 U.S.C. § 3061(a)(3)](https://www.govregs.com/uscode/title18_partII_chapter203_section3061) expressly empowers the Board of Governors of the Postal Service to authorize Postal Service officers and employees ‘performing duties related to the inspection of postal matters’ to ‘make arrests without warrant for felonies cognizable under the laws of the United States if they have reasonable grounds to believe that the person to be arrested has committed or is committing such a felony.’ \[T]he inspector and his subordinates, in arresting Watson, were acting strictly in accordance with the governing statute and regulations. The effect of the judgment of the Court of Appeals was to invalidate the statute as applied in this case and as applied to all the situations where a court fails to find exigent circumstances justifying a warrantless arrest. We reverse that judgment.

Section 3061 represents a judgment by Congress that it is not unreasonable under the Fourth Amendment for postal inspectors to arrest without a warrant provided they have probable cause to do so. This was not an isolated or quixotic judgment of the legislative branch. Other federal law enforcement officers have been expressly authorized by statute for many years to make felony arrests on probable cause but without a warrant. This is true of United States marshals, and of agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Secret Service, and the Customs Service.

\[T]here is nothing in the Court’s prior cases indicating that under the Fourth Amendment a warrant is required to make a valid arrest for a felony. Indeed, the relevant prior decisions are uniformly to the contrary.

The cases construing the Fourth Amendment \[] reflect the ancient common-law rule that a peace officer was permitted to arrest without a warrant for a misdemeanor or felony committed in his presence as well as for a felony not committed in his presence if there was reasonable ground for making the arrest.

## Justice Powell's Concurrence

In a concurrence, Justice Powell noted the “anomaly” created by decisions requiring warrants for searches absent exceptional circumstances—even when police have probable cause—and the decision in _Watson_ allowing warrantless arrests based upon probable cause. He wrote, “Logic therefore would seem to dictate that arrests be subject to the warrant requirement at least to the same extent as searches.”&#x20;

But he nonetheless joined the majority because of “history and experience.” He explained as follows:

> **The \[majority's] opinion emphasizes the historical sanction accorded warrantless felony arrests. In the early days of the common law most felony arrests were made upon personal knowledge and without warrants. So established were such arrests as the usual practice that** [**Lord Coke**](https://oll.libertyfund.org/people/sir-edward-coke) **seriously questioned whether a justice of the peace, receiving his information secondhand instead of from personal knowledge, even could authorize an arrest by warrant. By the late 18th century it had been firmly established by** [**Blackstone**](https://constitutioncenter.org/the-constitution/historic-document-library/detail/william-blackstonecommentaries-on-the-laws-of-england-1765-69)**, with an intervening assist from** [**Sir Matthew Hale**](https://www.jstor.org/stable/3313082)**, that magistrates could issue arrest warrants upon information supplied by others. But recognition of the warrant power cast no doubt upon the validity of warrantless felony arrests, which continued to be practiced and upheld as before. There is no historical evidence that the Framers or proponents of the Fourth Amendment, outspokenly opposed to the infamous general warrants and writs of assistance, were at all concerned about warrantless arrests by local constables and other peace officers.**
>
> **The historical momentum for acceptance of warrantless arrests, already strong at the adoption of the Fourth Amendment, has gained strength during the ensuing two centuries. Both the judiciary and the legislative bodies of this Nation repeatedly have placed their imprimaturs upon the practice and, as the Government emphasizes, law enforcement agencies have developed their investigative and arrest procedures upon an assumption that warrantless arrests were valid so long as based upon probable cause.**

Note that Justice Powell’s concurrence in _Watson_ referred to “warrantless felony arrests,” and the majority referred to “the ancient common-law rule that a peace officer was permitted to arrest without a warrant for a misdemeanor or felony committed in his presence as well as for a felony not committed in his presence.” What about warrantless arrests for misdemeanors not committed in the officer’s presence, about which the officer has probable cause to believe suspects have committed? For example, if a shopkeeper describes a suspect in detail and reports seeing him steal a candy bar, police would likely have probable cause to arrest the suspect for larceny, and in many jurisdictions such minor theft would be a misdemeanor. May the officer arrest the suspect without a warrant? Common law generally did not allow such arrests, but states now have statutes allowing them (some for all misdemeanors, others only for certain misdemeanors).&#x20;

Although the Supreme Court has not decided the question, the answer appears to be that if states wish to, they may authorize their police to conduct such arrests. _See, e.g._, William A. Schroeder, _Warrantless Misdemeanor Arrests and the Fourth Amendment,_ [58 Mo. L. Rev. 771, 811–17](https://scholarship.law.missouri.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3150\&context=mlr) (1993); _State v. Walker_, [138 P.3d 113](https://caselaw.findlaw.com/wa-supreme-court/1171864.html), 120 (Wash. 2006) (“every federal circuit court that has addressed the issue has found the Fourth Amendment does not require the misdemeanor to occur in the officer’s presence in order for a warrantless arrest to be valid”).

In the [next case](atwater-v.-city-of-lago-vista.md), the Court considered an officer who used the authority granted under _United States v. Watson_—which allows warrantless arrests—in an arguably unreasonable manner. The question was not whether the Justices approved of the challenged police behavior; they did not. Instead, the Court decided whether warrantless arrests for certain minor criminal offenses are “unreasonable” under the Fourth Amendment.

<details>

<summary>Attributions and Licensing</summary>

This page is adapted from [2.18: Chapter 19 - Seizures and Arrests](https://biz.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Criminal_Law/Criminal_Procedure%3A_A_Free_Law_School_Casebook_2e_\(Alexander_and_Trachtenberg\)/02%3A_The_Fourth_Amendment/2.18%3A_Chapter_19_-_Seizures_and_Arrests?searchBar=wesby?readerView) in [_Criminal Procedure: A Free Law School Casebook 2e_](https://biz.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Criminal_Law/Criminal_Procedure%3A_A_Free_Law_School_Casebook_2e_\(Alexander_and_Trachtenberg\)) by [Anne M Alexander](https://law.missouri.edu/directory/anne-alexander/) and [Ben Trachtenberg](https://law.missouri.edu/directory/ben-trachtenberg/), used under [CC BY-NC-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/). This page is licensed under [CC BY-NC-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).

</details>

